 <p>
      <br /> <br />
    </p>
    <h3>
      To W. W. K.
    </h3>
    <p>
      <br /><br />
    </p>
    <hr />
    <p>
      <a name="link2H_PREF" id="link2H_PREF"> </a>
    </p>
    <div style="height: 4em;">
      <br /><br /><br /><br />
    </div>
    <h2>
      PREFACE TO THIS EDITION
    </h2>
    <p>
      In the autumn of 1903 I used to dine frequently in a restaurant in the Rue
      de Clichy, Paris. Here were, among others, two waitresses that attracted
      my attention. One was a beautiful, pale young girl, to whom I never spoke,
      for she was employed far away from the table which I affected. The other,
      a stout, middle-aged managing Breton woman, had sole command over my table
      and me, and gradually she began to assume such a maternal tone towards me
      that I saw I should be compelled to leave that restaurant. If I was absent
      for a couple of nights running she would reproach me sharply: “What!
      you are unfaithful to me?” Once, when I complained about some French
      beans, she informed me roundly that French beans were a subject which I
      did not understand. I then decided to be eternally unfaithful to her, and
      I abandoned the restaurant. A few nights before the final parting an old
      woman came into the restaurant to dine. She was fat, shapeless, ugly, and
      grotesque. She had a ridiculous voice, and ridiculous gestures. It was
      easy to see that she lived alone, and that in the long lapse of years she
      had developed the kind of peculiarity which induces guffaws among the
      thoughtless. She was burdened with a lot of small parcels, which she kept
      dropping. She chose one seat; and then, not liking it, chose another; and
      then another. In a few moments she had the whole restaurant laughing at
      her. That my middle-aged Breton should laugh was indifferent to me, but I
      was pained to see a coarse grimace of giggling on the pale face of the
      beautiful young waitress to whom I had never spoken.
    </p>
    <p>
      I reflected, concerning the grotesque diner: “This woman was once
      young, slim, perhaps beautiful; certainly free from these ridiculous
      mannerisms. Very probably she is unconscious of her singularities. Her
      case is a tragedy. One ought to be able to make a heartrending novel out
      of the history of a woman such as she.” Every stout, ageing woman is
      not grotesque—far from it!—but there is an extreme pathos in
      the mere fact that every stout ageing woman was once a young girl with the
      unique charm of youth in her form and movements and in her mind. And the
      fact that the change from the young girl to the stout ageing woman is made
      up of an infinite number of infinitesimal changes, each unperceived by
      her, only intensifies the pathos.
    </p>
    <p>
      It was at this instant that I was visited by the idea of writing the book
      which ultimately became “The Old Wives’ Tale.” Of course
      I felt that the woman who caused the ignoble mirth in the restaurant would
      not serve me as a type of heroine. For she was much too old and obviously
      unsympathetic. It is an absolute rule that the principal character of a
      novel must not be unsympathetic, and the whole modern tendency of
      realistic fiction is against oddness in a prominent figure. I knew that I
      must choose the sort of woman who would pass unnoticed in a crowd.
    </p>
    <p>
      I put the idea aside for a long time, but it was never very distant from
      me. For several reasons it made a special appeal to me. I had always been
      a convinced admirer of Mrs. W. K. Clifford’s most precious novel,
      “Aunt Anne,” but I wanted to see in the story of an old woman
      many things that Mrs. W. K. Clifford had omitted from “Aunt Anne.”
      Moreover, I had always revolted against the absurd youthfulness, the
      unfading youthfulness of the average heroine. And as a protest against
      this fashion, I was already, in 1903, planning a novel (“Leonora”)
      of which the heroine was aged forty, and had daughters old enough to be in
      love. The reviewers, by the way, were staggered by my hardihood in
      offering a woman of forty as a subject of serious interest to the public.
      But I meant to go much farther than forty! Finally as a supreme reason, I
      had the example and the challenge of Guy de Maupassant’s “Une
      Vie.” In the nineties we used to regard “Une Vie” with
      mute awe, as being the summit of achievement in fiction. And I remember
      being very cross with Mr. Bernard Shaw because, having read “Une Vie”
      at the suggestion (I think) of Mr. William Archer, he failed to see in it
      anything very remarkable. Here I must confess that, in 1908, I read
      “Une Vie” again, and in spite of a natural anxiety to differ
      from Mr. Bernard Shaw, I was gravely disappointed with it. It is a fine
      novel, but decidedly inferior to “Pierre et Jean” or even
      “Fort Comme la Mort.” To return to the year 1903. “Une
      Vie” relates the entire life history of a woman. I settled in the
      privacy of my own head that my book about the development of a young girl
      into a stout old lady must be the English “Une Vie.” I have
      been accused of every fault except a lack of self-confidence, and in a few
      weeks I settled a further point, namely, that my book must “go one
      better” than “Une Vie,” and that to this end it must be
      the life-history of two women instead of only one. Hence, “The Old
      Wives’ Tale” has two heroines. Constance was the original;
      Sophia was created out of bravado, just to indicate that I declined to
      consider Guy de Maupassant as the last forerunner of the deluge. I was
      intimidated by the audacity of my project, but I had sworn to carry it
      out. For several years I looked it squarely in the face at intervals, and
      then walked away to write novels of smaller scope, of which I produced
      five or six. But I could not dally forever, and in the autumn of 1907 I
      actually began to write it, in a village near Fontainebleau, where I
      rented half a house from a retired railway servant. I calculated that it
      would be 200,000 words long (which it exactly proved to be), and I had a
      vague notion that no novel of such dimensions (except Richardson’s)
      had ever been written before. So I counted the words in several famous
      Victorian novels, and discovered to my relief that the famous Victorian
      novels average 400,000 words apiece. I wrote the first part of the novel
      in six weeks. It was fairly easy to me, because, in the seventies, in the
      first decade of my life, I had lived in the actual draper’s shop of
      the Baines’s, and knew it as only a child could know it. Then I went
      to London on a visit. I tried to continue the book in a London hotel, but
      London was too distracting, and I put the thing away, and during January
      and February of 1908, I wrote “Buried Alive,” which was
      published immediately, and was received with majestic indifference by the
      English public, an indifference which has persisted to this day.
    </p>
    <p>
      I then returned to the Fontainebleau region and gave “The Old Wives’
      Tale” no rest till I finished it at the end of July, 1908. It was
      published in the autumn of the same year, and for six weeks afterward the
      English public steadily confirmed an opinion expressed by a certain person
      in whose judgment I had confidence, to the effect that the work was honest
      but dull, and that when it was not dull it had a regrettable tendency to
      facetiousness. My publishers, though brave fellows, were somewhat
      disheartened; however, the reception of the book gradually became less and
      less frigid.
    </p>
    <p>
      With regard to the French portion of the story, it was not until I had
      written the first part that I saw from a study of my chronological basis
      that the Siege of Paris might be brought into the tale. The idea was
      seductive; but I hated, and still hate, the awful business of research;
      and I only knew the Paris of the Twentieth Century. Now I was aware that
      my railway servant and his wife had been living in Paris at the time of
      the war. I said to the old man, “By the way, you went through the
      Siege of Paris, didn’t you?” He turned to his old wife and
      said, uncertainly, “The Siege of Paris? Yes, we did, didn’t
      we?” The Siege of Paris had been only one incident among many in
      their lives. Of course, they remembered it well, though not vividly, and I
      gained much information from them. But the most useful thing which I
      gained from them was the perception, startling at first, that ordinary
      people went on living very ordinary lives in Paris during the siege, and
      that to the vast mass of the population the siege was not the dramatic,
      spectacular, thrilling, ecstatic affair that is described in history.
      Encouraged by this perception, I decided to include the siege in my
      scheme. I read Sarcey’s diary of the siege aloud to my wife, and I
      looked at the pictures in Jules Claretie’s popular work on the siege
      and the commune, and I glanced at the printed collection of official
      documents, and there my research ended.
    </p>
    <p>
      It has been asserted that unless I had actually been present at a public
      execution, I could not have written the chapter in which Sophia was at the
      Auxerre solemnity. I have not been present at a public execution, as the
      whole of my information about public executions was derived from a series
      of articles on them which I read in the Paris Matin. Mr. Frank Harris,
      discussing my book in “Vanity Fair,” said it was clear that I
      had not seen an execution, (or words to that effect), and he proceeded to
      give his own description of an execution. It was a brief but terribly
      convincing bit of writing, quite characteristic and quite worthy of the
      author of “Montes the Matador” and of a man who has been
      almost everywhere and seen almost everything. I comprehended how far short
      I had fallen of the truth! I wrote to Mr. Frank Harris, regretting that
      his description had not been printed before I wrote mine, as I should
      assuredly have utilized it, and, of course, I admitted that I had never
      witnessed an execution. He simply replied: “Neither have I.”
      This detail is worth preserving, for it is a reproof to that large body of
      readers, who, when a novelist has really carried conviction to them,
      assert off hand: “O, that must be autobiography!”
    </p>
    <h3>
      ARNOLD BENNETT.
    </h3>
    <p>
      <br /><br />
    </p>
    <hr />
    <p>
      <br /><br />
    </p>
    <p>
      <b>CONTENTS</b>
    </p>
    <p class="toc">
      <a href="#link2H_PREF"> PREFACE TO THIS EDITION </a>
    </p>
    <p class="toc">
      <a href="#link2H_4_0003"> <b>BOOK I — MRS. BAINES </b> </a>
    </p>
    <p class="toc">
      <a href="#link2HCH0001"> CHAPTER I — THE SQUARE </a>
    </p>
    <p class="toc">
      <a href="#link2HCH0002"> CHAPTER II — THE TOOTH </a>
    </p>
    <p class="toc">
      <a href="#link2HCH0003"> CHAPTER III — A BATTLE </a>
    </p>
    <p class="toc">
      <a href="#link2HCH0004"> CHAPTER IV — ELEPHANT </a>
    </p>
    <p class="toc">
      <a href="#link2HCH0005"> CHAPTER V — THE TRAVELLER </a>
    </p>
    <p class="toc">
      <a href="#link2HCH0006"> CHAPTER VI — ESCAPADE </a>
    </p>
    <p class="toc">
      <a href="#link2HCH0007"> CHAPTER VII — A DEFEAT </a>
    </p>
    <p>
      <br />
    </p>
    <p class="toc">
      <a href="#link2H_4_0011"> <b>BOOK II — CONSTANCE</b> </a>
    </p>
    <p class="toc">
      <a href="#link2HCH0008"> CHAPTER I — REVOLUTION </a>
    </p>
    <p class="toc">
      <a href="#link2HCH0009"> CHAPTER II — CHRISTMAS AND THE FUTURE </a>
    </p>
    <p class="toc">
      <a href="#link2HCH0010"> CHAPTER III — CYRIL </a>
    </p>
    <p class="toc">
      <a href="#link2HCH0011"> CHAPTER IV — CRIME </a>
    </p>
    <p class="toc">
      <a href="#link2HCH0012"> CHAPTER V — ANOTHER CRIME </a>
    </p>
    <p class="toc">
      <a href="#link2HCH0013"> CHAPTER VI — THE WIDOW </a>
    </p>
    <p class="toc">
      <a href="#link2HCH0014"> CHAPTER VII — BRICKS AND MORTAR </a>
    </p>
    <p class="toc">
      <a href="#link2HCH0015"> CHAPTER VIII — THE PROUDEST MOTHER </a>
    </p>
    <p>
      <br />
    </p>
    <p class="toc">
      <a href="#link2H_4_0020"> <b>BOOK III — SOPHIA</b> </a>
    </p>
    <p class="toc">
      <a href="#link2HCH0016"> CHAPTER I — THE ELOPEMENT </a>
    </p>
    <p class="toc">
      <a href="#link2HCH0017"> CHAPTER II — SUPPER </a>
    </p>
    <p class="toc">
      <a href="#link2HCH0018"> CHAPTER III — AN AMBITION SATISFIED </a>
    </p>
    <p class="toc">
      <a href="#link2HCH0019"> CHAPTER IV — A CRISIS FOR GERALD </a>
    </p>
    <p class="toc">
      <a href="#link2HCH0020"> CHAPTER V — FEVER </a>
    </p>
    <p class="toc">
      <a href="#link2HCH0021"> CHAPTER VI — THE SIEGE </a>
    </p>
    <p class="toc">
      <a href="#link2HCH0022"> CHAPTER VII — SUCCESS </a>
    </p>
    <p>
      <br />
    </p>
    <p class="toc">
      <a href="#link2H_4_0028"> <b>BOOK IV — WHAT LIFE IS</b> </a>
    </p>
    <p class="toc">
      <a href="#link2HCH0023"> CHAPTER I — FRENSHAM’S </a>
    </p>
    <p class="toc">
      <a href="#link2HCH0024"> CHAPTER II — THE MEETING </a>
    </p>
    <p class="toc">
      <a href="#link2HCH0025"> CHAPTER III — TOWARDS HOTEL LIFE </a>
    </p>
    <p class="toc">
      <a href="#link2HCH0026"> CHAPTER IV — END OF SOPHIA </a>
    </p>
    <p class="toc">
      <a href="#link2HCH0027"> CHAPTER V — END OF CONSTANCE </a>
    </p>
    <div style="height: 4em;">
      <br /><br /><br /><br />
    </div>
    <p>
      <br /><br />
    </p>
    <hr />
    <p>
      <a name="link2H_4_0003" id="link2H_4_0003"> </a>
    </p>
    <div style="height: 4em;">
      <br /><br /><br /><br />
    </div>